Summary of "Memory Resource Management in VMware ESX Server" by Carl
A. Waldspurger

This paper discusses the specific problem of memory allocation and
management for multiple Virtual Machines (VMs) on the Virtual Machine
Monitor (VMM) VMware ESX Server.  This topic is important in order to
fairly, reasonably, and efficiently divide a host Operating System's
(OS) memory among its guest OSes.

In this paper, several techniques have been implemented in ESX Server to
manage memory:  ballooning, idle memory tax, content-based page sharing,
and hot I/O page remapping.  These are improvements on previous work
because they do not modify existing guest OSes beyond adding device
drivers, and they efficiently share the memory resources of the guest
OS, even to oversubscribing.

The four techniques are novel in the way they manage memory:  For
ballooning, the guest OS pages out memory as it always has, without
knowing that the reason is due to the balloon device driver.  By adding
an idle memory tax, memory that is not in use by some VMs can be given to
others.  The page sharing techniques reduce memory usage by deduplicating
pages of memory for use across multiple VMs.  I/O page remapping reduces
the amount of wait time on the host by reducing I/O.

The method of approach of this work is through implementing each new
technique on an ESX Server guest OS and testing the results each
technique brings individually.  The combination of all of these
techniques results in a better VMM.

The evaluations are in the form of repeated tests of different
parameters across multiple runs.  The results are explained and
graphed in concrete figures.  The evaluations cover most aspects
considered at the time of its writing, and mention future improvements
or alternative methods that should have been considered.

This work was very important.  It introduced or improved upon many
techniques still used today in many different VMMs, and has since
been cited by 1638 papers according to ACM, including our other paper,
"Xen and the Art of Virtualization".

-- Jas Eckard
